New RFC: multi-tenancy (#85)
giantswarm/rfc: multi-tenancy-observability/README.md

---
creation_date: 2024-02-08
issues:
- https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/2771
owners:
- https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
state: review

> summary: How GiantSwarm manages multi-tenancy to isolate observability data by tenants (i.e. metrics, logs, traces).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: How Giant Swarm manages multi-tenancy to isolate observability data by tenants (i.e. metrics, logs, traces).
```

> summary: How GiantSwarm manages multi-tenancy to isolate observability data by tenants (i.e. metrics, logs, traces).

Reviewer: nitpick: I think it's better to use per tenant than by tenant

---

> # Multi-tenancy proposal on observability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Multi-tenancy for observability
```

I would remove the proposal part

## Introduction

> Since we have a logging infrastructure, we are thinking about the multi-tenancy.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need this sentence tbh

> The observability stack with metrics, logs, traces is managing a lot of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Giant Swarm managed components produce a lot of observability data (metrics, logs, traces and so on) For instance, we have reached our ingestion limits in Prometheus more than a year ago.

On top of this, as part of the developer platform, we want to be able to ingest all sorts of customer observability data.

To that end, we now need to move towards multi-tenancy in our observability stack.

Thankfully, our logging solution Loki supports multi-tenancy based on a http header (`X-Org-ID`) and we already had to implement things .. @marieroque let's talk about the read user here

To be able to support multi-tenancy in our monitoring stack, we are currently working on moving to mimir on CAPI as mimir supports the same multi-tenancy mechanism as Loki (@marieroque maybe link the epic)
```

According to the role of people, some data must be accessible or not.
We would like to propose our customers the option of defining their tenants so that they can isolate the data as they want.

> Our product currently allows anyone with access to Grafana to request all the data: metrics and logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Presently, our product allows anyone with access to Grafana to request all the data (metrics and logs) for all tenants. This is part of the reason why only a subset of our customers (only the platform teams) have access to our managed grafana and it also why our shared installation grafana is not accessible to customers.
```

Those datas are written with a tenant id that corresponds to the cluster id.

Our idea of multi-tenancy is to be able to isolate data by tenant. A tenant can be anything: a namespace, a cluster id, a group of people, a feature, etc.

> In this document we will talk mostly about the logs (with `Loki`), but we expect to share the same logic for all components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this document we will talk mostly about the logs (with `Loki`), but we expect to share the same logic for all our observability stack components.
```

> We need to discuss how we handle multi-tenancy when accessing data (read path) and when sending it to object storage (write path).

Reviewer: Because the read and write path for the multi-tenancy is technically different, we decided to split it into different sections.

owners:
- https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
state: review
summary: How Giant Swarm manages multi-tenancy to isolate observability data per tenants (i.e. metrics, logs, traces).
---

# Multi-tenancy for observability

## Glossary

- `tenant`: a group of users who share a common access with specific privileges to observability data
- `observability data`: all data related to metrics, logs, traces, profiles
- `read path`: path used by users to access observability data
- `write path`: path used by components to store observability data

## Introduction

Giant Swarm managed components produce a lot of observability data (metrics, logs, traces and so on).
For instance, we have reached our ingestion limits in Prometheus more than a year ago.
On top of this, as part of the developer platform, we want to be able to ingest all sorts of customer observability data and provide data isolation between tenants.

To that end, we now need to move towards multi-tenancy in our observability stack.
Thankfully, our logging solution Loki supports multi-tenancy based on a http header (`X-Org-ID`) and we already had to implement things.

> The graph below shows our current implementation of the multi-tenancy on logs:
> <img src="./assets/scope-orgid.png" width="500" alt="Loki multi-tenancy and X-Scope-OrgID header">

Reviewer 2: For better readability, to make the image a separate paragraph

```suggestion
The graph below shows our current implementation of the multi-tenancy on logs:

<img src="./assets/scope-orgid.png" width="500" alt="Loki multi-tenancy and X-Scope-OrgID header">
```

---
creation_date: 2024-02-08
issues:
- https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/2771
owners:
- https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
state: review

> summary: How Giant Swarm manages multi-tenancy to isolate observability data per tenants (i.e. metrics, logs, traces).

Reviewer 3: I stumbled over _this PR_ from `#noise-rfc` and because of the summary. Since I'm currently preparing some best practices for technical writing, I have some nits regarding technical writing quality 😉. I know the RFC is still being drafted, but I wanted to leave these comments already.

---

This is not a summary, but the title of the RFC. Please put here what the RFC proposes, i.e. actions and changes.

Reviewer: Could you maybe give me examples so I could improve?

---

# Multi-tenancy for observability

## Glossary

> - `tenant`: a group of users who share a common access with specific privileges to observability data

Reviewer 3: Which users? Of the customer, of Giant Swarm? Maybe provide examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tenant`: a group of individuals (from our customers or Giant Swarm alike) who share a common access with specific privileges to observability data
```

> - `observability data`: all data related to metrics, logs, traces, profiles

Reviewer 3: "data related to metrics [...]", or rather "metrics [...]" directly?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `observability data`: metrics, logs, traces, profiles and so on
```

- `read path`: path used by users to access observability data
- `write path`: path used by components to store observability data

## Introduction

Giant Swarm managed components produce a lot of observability data (metrics, logs, traces and so on).

> For instance, we have reached our ingestion limits in Prometheus more than a year ago.

Reviewer 3: Please use absolute terms ("a year ago" is undefined if somebody reads this later)

On top of this, as part of the developer platform, we want to be able to ingest all sorts of customer observability data and provide data isolation between tenants.

To that end, we now need to move towards multi-tenancy in our observability stack.

> Thankfully, our logging solution Loki supports multi-tenancy based on a http header (`X-Org-ID`) and we already had to implement things.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Thankfully, our logging solution Loki supports multi-tenancy based on a http header (`X-Org-ID`) and we already had to implement things.
```

what does 'implement things' here mean?

To be able to support multi-tenancy in our monitoring stack, we are currently working on moving to mimir on CAPI as mimir supports the same multi-tenancy mechanism as Loki, see our current status on the [epic](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/3039).

According to the role of people, some data must be accessible or not.
We would like to propose our customers the option of defining their tenants so that they can isolate the data as they want.

> Presently, our product allows anyone with access to Grafana to request all the data (metrics and logs) for all tenants. This is part of the reason why only a subset of our customers (only the platform teams) have access to our managed grafana and it also why our shared installation grafana is not accessible to customers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Presently, our product allows anyone with access to Grafana to request all the data (metrics and logs) for all tenants. This is part of the reason why only a subset of our customers (only the platform teams) have access to our managed grafana and is also why our shared installation grafana is not accessible to customers.
```

grammar nitpick

}
```

The component `loki-multi-tenant-proxy` should be renamed `grafana-multi-tenant-proxy` to be more generic because it will handle multi-tenancy for logs, metrics, traces, etc.
That component should have a configuration in which the mapping between groups of people and tenants is defined.

Below a proposal of such a configuration:

```yaml
groups:
- name: giantswarm-admins
  tenant_ids:
  - mc-name
  - wcdev-name
  - wcprod-name
- name: Developers
  tenant_ids:
  - wcdev-name
- name: Ops
  tenant_ids:
  - wcdev-name
  - wcprod-name
...
```

That configuration should be dynamically created and updated regardless of the data source.
We are thinking of having an operator to manage that mapping. The operator would be able to reconcile any kind of data source and generate the configuration expected by `grafana-multi-tenant-proxy`.

Below is a graph exposing multi-tenancy proposal:

<img src="./assets/future-multi-tenancy.png" width="300" alt="Multi-tenancy proposal on the read path">

### Opened questions

#### Teleport issue

We are currently facing an issue with `teleport` authentication:
[Teleport JWT issue](https://github.com/giantswarm/giantswarm/issues/29719)

> We are authentified on Grafana through a JWT token provided by teleport.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We are authenticated on Grafana through a JWT token provided by teleport.
```
grammar nitpick

As part of the developer platform, we want to be able to ingest all sorts of customer observability data. For example a lot of customers are interested in monitoring of application developers workloads. This will require Giant Swarm observability platform to be able to provide data isolation between tenants, so that customer teams have limited access to the data originating on clusters they own.

To that end, we now need to move towards multi-tenancy in our observability.

## Current situation

### Our Logging stack

Our logging solution Loki supports multi-tenancy based on a http header (`X-Org-ID`) and we already had to implement some basic form of multi-tenancy to be able to support the logs coming from our clusters.

The graph below shows our current implementation of the multi-tenancy on logs:

<img src="./assets/scope-orgid.png" width="500" alt="Loki multi-tenancy and X-Scope-OrgID header">

> In summary, we use a Reverse Proxy in front of all Loki components. This Proxy sets the `X-Org-ID` header based on the authentication information it receives. The proxy configuration (tenant and user/password keypairs) are managed by an operator named `logging-operator`. This operator also configure the tenant and user/password keypairs information for the logging agents that they then use to send logs to loki via the Reverse Proxy.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In summary, we use a Reverse Proxy in front of all Loki components. This Proxy sets the `X-Org-ID` header based on the authentication information it receives. The proxy configuration (tenant and user/password keypairs) are managed by an operator named `logging-operator`. This operator also configures the tenant and user/password keypairs information for the logging agents that they then use to send logs to loki via the Reverse Proxy.
```

### Future of monitoring

We already have plans to migrate our monitoring stack to Grafana Mimir, which supports the same multi-tenancy mechanism as Loki. You can see the current status in this [epic](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/3039).

## What we want to achieve

We want to be able to segregate access to the observability data based on the user groups our customers have configured in their active directory.

But we also want to provide flexibility to customers to allow them to isolate their data as they want.
For instance, some customers may want to map:
- 1 tenant to 1 namespace
- 1 tenant to 1 cluster
- multiple tenants to 1 application (e.g. ingress controllers)
We would like to propose our customers the option of defining their tenants so that they can isolate the data as they want.

__Disclaimer:__ We might change this flexibility later on based on product (e.g. project CR) or operational decisions ( e.g. too many tenants).

> In this document we will look at the multi-tenancy concept on the example of the logging implementation (with `Loki`) as this is where we already collected experience with it. But we expect to share the same logic across all of our observability stack components.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In this document we will look at the multi-tenancy concept with the example of the logging implementation (with `Loki`) as this is where we already collected experience with it. But we expect to share the same logic across all of our observability stack components.
```

## Read path

### Current architecture for the read path

Below is a graph exposing the current state of multi-tenancy:

<img src="./assets/current-multi-tenancy.png" width="300" alt="Loki multi-tenancy on the read path">

The read path queries `loki` providing an `X-Scope-OrgID` header which contains the identifier (the `read` tenant) of all clusters: the management cluster plus all workload clusters.

### Configuring multi-tenancy on the read path

We have asserted that we can retrieve users groups through the OAuth token that is received from Grafana when we enable OAuth-forwarding on the Loki datasource.

Below is an example of OAuth token content coming from Dex:

```json
{
  "iss": "https://dex.golem.gaws.gigantic.io",
  "sub": "XXXXXXX",
  "aud": "YYYYYYY",
  "exp": 1705661375,
  "iat": 1705659575,
  "email": "people@giantswarm.io",
  "email_verified": true,
  "groups": [
    "giantswarm-ad:giantswarm-admins",
    "giantswarm-ad:GS Support - MS teams",
    "giantswarm-ad:Giant Swarm Global",
    "giantswarm-ad:GiantSwarm",
    "giantswarm-ad:Giant Swarm EU",
    "giantswarm-ad:Developers"
  ],
  "name": "People People"
}
```

> The component `loki-multi-tenant-proxy` which has now been renamed to `grafana-multi-tenant-proxy` should be configured with the mapping between groups of people and tenants

Reviewer 5: Maybe it could be worth to explain in a short sentence why the name has changed.

We are open to suggestions on this topic.

### Open questions

#### Teleport issue

We are currently facing an issue with `teleport` authentication:
[Teleport JWT issue](https://github.com/giantswarm/giantswarm/issues/29719)

We are authenticated on Grafana through a JWT token provided by teleport.
But that token is not forwarded to the datasource as this is not using the Grafana OAuth plugin to authenticate. Due to this, we cannot access the users groups in the grafana-multi-tenant-proxy.

We are considering a number of options that are not ideal at the moment:

- having double datasource: one for customer with OAuth authentication and another dedicated to GiantSwarm people authenticated throw teleport.
- having double grafana (same idea than above but for the all grafana instance, not just the datasource).
- share an authentication secret via cookies.
- other ideas are welcome!

#### Mapping user's groups to tenants

What interface could we offer our customers to enable them to define the mapping between their groups and their tenants:

> - Custom resources like TenantCR, GroupCR

Reviewer 6: It is related, but I can see us pulling the concept apart so we can "translate" a project CR to specific custom CRs like a o11ytenant CR or sth. Because Project CR should be depicting project/namespace/team and other info, but here for example we only map OIDC group to o11ytenant, so this is more like RBAC binding.

> - Custom resources like TenantCR, GroupCR

Reviewer: In the beggining, we can have this maintained by us via giant swarm config until we think about the UX side to not block this RFC, but I'm not sure where (should we create a WG around multi-tenancy)?

- UI in happa
- other ideas ?

## Write path

### Current architecture for the write path

On the write path, we currently use promtail to collect container and machine logs and grafana agent to collect kubernetes events.

We currently need those 2 tools because:
1. Promtail cannot get kubernetes events

> 2. Grafana Agent is going through quite a big rewrite in it's configuration and all features we needed were not supported when we deployed it

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Grafana Agent is going through quite a big rewrite in its configuration and all features we needed were not supported when we deployed it
```

Here is what the flow looks like:
1. The logging-operator creates a `password` for the cluster's logging agents to be able to send logs to Loki and configures them (actual configuration of what to scrape and so on) via an extra-config.
2. The logging-operator adds the new cluster_id/password pair to the proxy configuration

> 3. The logging agents collect and send logs to the loki-multi-tenant-proxy which validates the basic authentication sent in the http header and transform it into a tenant information (X-Scope_OrgID)

Reviewer 7: What in a future case where customer can define multiple tenants for write path, is that possible? does it require multiple instances of promtail and/or grafana agent?

Reviewer 6: From what we discussed before IIRC we can have multiple tenants , but it would mean some data duplication. But @QuentinBisson can explain it better

Reviewer: Yes exactly, so the tenants can be set in promtail as a label via what they called a pipeline stage so if they want they can set multiple tenant, but that means the data will be stored and queries twice so we would advise against it :)

This is why the idea of setting a tenant per namespace makes sense :)

4. Loki writes the data to storage for the configured tenant (cluster_id in that case)

### Configuring multi-tenancy on the write path

#### Different tenant configuration options

After a few different customer calls, we found out that they have different needs when it comes to multi-tenancy.

##### Cluster == Tenant

This is the approach we are currently using for technical reasons. We do not think this would match with customers workload as they mostly have a lot of customers sharing clusters.

##### Namespace == Tenant

This approach makes it really easy for us and customers to configure tenants and it would definitely be easy to onboard teams (e.g. adding a label on the namespace would make the agents collect logs from the containers in the namespace).

But this approach brings a few questions:

> 1. What tenancy should common internal apps use (e.g. prometheus-operator, api-server, cilium logs are accessed by multiple internal teams)? Do we need to ensure customers are putting those apps into a namespace accessible by all?

Reviewer: For my discussion with customers, prometheus-operator was moved to another namespace because teams did not have access to kube-system logs :D

> 1. What tenancy should common internal apps use (e.g. prometheus-operator, api-server, cilium logs are accessed by multiple internal teams)? Do we need to ensure customers are putting those apps into a namespace accessible by all?

Reviewer: So, my main questions in this case is more for our managed apps because customers can install them in namespaces they want and it could also be running with their own workload like it is the case with prometheus-operator. Now we technically have access to all the logs because we manage the clusters but in loki, we could theoretically reduce our access to only kube-system, giantswarm namespaces and managed apps logs only.

Do we want to go in that direction or should Giant Swarm have access to all logs by default?

> 2. What about teams that share namespaces?

Reviewer 6: From what I know from customers, we rarely have that outside of kube-system

Reviewer: It's also the case for the monitoring namespace and it would probably the same tenants that can access the kube-system namespace

##### App == Tenant

> This approach is especially flexible for customers but we do not think this approach makes sense because the mapping configuration would be impossible to maintain and we would probably face technical limits pretty fast

Reviewer 8: IMO this is the natural end state.

Two valid requests:
- "The team that owns namespace X can view logs from any application in that namespace"
- "The monitoring team can view prometheus logs from any namespace in any cluster where they run prometheus"

Roughly app-level granularity is inevitable in my mind. It also works well with other potential features (described in the general comment).

Reviewer: It could be but then I do not think it works for all things.

Usually, customers run applications for one team in one namespace with a clear boundary. Sure, prometheus might be a bit different but that's really dependant on the customers organizations.

What I do not like in this is that if you want all the logs of all apps in one namespace, then loki will actually run at least number of apps queries. Sure they're paralellized and so on but that does look a bit too much to me for most use cases.

Reviewer 8: > loki will actually run at least number of apps queries

The actual query implementation is beyond my knowledge :sweat_smile: Sure, it might be prohibitively expensive or that this is intentionally nerfed in OSS and reserved for enterprise versions.

BUT to the greatest extent possible, I would double down on the likelihood of needing app-level granularity support. Some other examples:
- any type of less-trusted collaborators (externals, students, etc.) who should have access to only certain components inside a namespace
- selective access to "system" resources - for example, there are multiple types of users who will need access to coredns or nginx, but they shouldn't have access to everything in the namespace, especially kube-system stuff. 
- automation - similar to above, but for machine accounts. 

If it is possible to change the tenant behavior later, maybe logging-operator could default to tenant-per-ns until the first app-level rule is applied, or create app tenants only for those targeted by allow rules. This probably means the capability would only apply to future logs, which is a tradeoff, but could be a workable middle ground.

Reviewer 6: Yes, from what I see, we can add levels of granularity on-demand, and we could even do that opt-in for apps, so it's not by default tenanted by app, but there's additional tenants for apps where we see demand for selective access control (e.g. we might at some point pull nginx, or coredns tenants into our default mapping). WDYT?

Reviewer 6: Yes, from what I understood a new tenant is a new and separate datastore, which makes duplication of data a topic in that context, but also the issues you mentioned, you basically won't be able to access historical data previous to tenant creation. Not sure about how that looks with queries, but that I would assume should not change as tenants should not influence data, but you never know, maybe @QuentinBisson knows more.

Reviewer: Yes you can think of it as a datastore and a tenant is only a http header so there is no reason why customers that want to migrate to 1 tenant per app would lose old logs if they keep the old and new tenants together :)

##### Hybrid mode

This approach would allow customers to be able to set the tenancy as they want (per namespace or per app depending on the use case).

#### Implementation details

> The implementation details are at this stage are still an open topic, because no single tool fulfills all of our requirements. Until this RFC we use two tools, grafana-agent and promtail, which are bot not yet feature complete.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The implementation details are at this stage still an open topic, because no single tool fulfills all of our requirements. As for the moment we wrote this RFC we used two tools, grafana-agent and promtail, which are both not yet feature complete.
```

One preferred alternative would be [PodLogs](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/operator/api/#podlogs-a-namemonitoringgrafanacomv1alpha1podlogsa), the equivalent of a Service or PodMonitor for metrics, but the existing implementation at the time of this RFC is not yet fully compliant with our needs as well.

We envisionned different distinct approaches here:

#### Approach 1: Customers provide their logs themselves

In this approach, based on the tenant information that the customer provided to us, we would generate a user/password pair that the customer would then use in their favorite log shipper to send their logs to Loki.

Pros:
- This is quite easy for us to implement as we already have the password generation logic
- We allow customers to use the tool they know and love.
- We will not receive pages if the tool is not working properly

Cons:
- This is far from the idea of a platform

> - There is a high risk that configuration will be messy and hard for use to debug when we need to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- There is a high risk that configuration will be messy and hard to use to debug when we need to
```

This approach might be useful for customers that want to send logs from outside the clusters

#### Approach 2: Extract tenant information from a label/PodLog

Existing logging agents support setting the tenant to send to loki using a custom log label.
We can configure our logging agents to get the logs of specific namespaces/pods if they have a label like `giantswarm.io/tenant: my-tenant` or using a PodLog CR (if applicable).

Pros:
- Quite easy to configure for logs

Cons:

> - Tenant configuration will need to be configured in multiple places (MC for the read path and WC for the write path)

Reviewer 6: Might not be a big problem as read path is access management and MC is a good place for that and write path workload related so deploying together with workload makes sense. The two lifecycles are separated.

- Label approach would most likely not work for metrics OOTB (this would require customer to add new labels like metrics port, path and so on).

> #### Approach 3: Configure promtail based on the MC tenancy CR

Reviewer 8: Unless the community provides a better option, some Giant Swarm abstraction is the likely end state for this use case. BUT, whether it is WC or MC level depends on architectural decisions about the Project CR which haven't been made yet.

Assuming a GitOps setup, consider the possible relationships between a GS Project CR and Flux. Does the Project CR live inside an application repository? If so, it would be a WC level resource. If the Project CR is managed separately from the application, it could be an MC-level resource. Those have tradeoffs and to my knowledge they haven't been discussed yet. 

So this mechanism could be WC-level (or could have complementary abstractions, like a label-based version of the same Project CR fields).

Reviewer: So the issue I have is that in my mind, a project CR would need need to be in the MC because a project can be cross clusters especially if customers have a cluster per stage as this is often the case.

Reviewer 8: Sure, maybe the Project CR ends up being MC-scoped, it just hasn't been decided. It definitely needs more wider discussion. My comment here was mostly to consider if there are aspects of logging that need to be under dev control, and if so, what that interface would look like.

Reviewer 6: We might in any case need a leveled approach where we have project CR on MC level, and some other CR on WC levels (a project needs to be deployed to x WCs). But even that WC level in some cases lives on the MC, when you look at HelmRelease or App CR for example. Other parts of WC level would live within WC and that's most probably unavoidable. Thus, to me it means we can handle these independently. It depends a lot on the architecture of implemenation, which the con below shows. Handling some delegation from an MC level resource to a WC level one is not a big issue and we do that regularly with Apps anyway.

> Altough the customer UX for the read path is still unclear, we can envision a CR like a Tenant CR that would map user's roles to namespaces/deployment under a given tenant name. The logging operator would then take care of applying all that logic

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Altough the customer UX for the read path is still unclear, we can envision a CR like a Tenant CR that would map users' roles to namespaces/deployments under a given tenant name. The logging operator would then take care of applying all that logic
```

Pros:
- Everything is happening on the MC and it could map to the Project CR concept that has been talked in Product for a while.

Cons:
- MC needs to be aware of the state of all WCs (has all namespaces and so on). How can customers be sure they have all logs?

#### Approach 4: We enforce 1 namespace == 1 tenant with flexibility by app and possibility of opting out

It is quite easy to configure 1 tenant per namespace in our current setup and we could use a giantswarm.io/logging: false on specific namespace or containers to not get the logs.

Pros:
- Customers would only have to fill out the read path configurations (unless they want to opt-out a lot)
- With this approach, we could still have a `giantswarm.io/tenant: my-tenant` label on some apps that should have a specific tenant attached to them.

Cons:

> - Our existing customers want to start slow (team by team) and opting-out for all namespaces from the start will be a hassle. An idea to avoid this would be to be able to opt-out of the multi-tenancy features with a cluster label (`giantswarm.io/tenancy: false`).

Reviewer 6: We can find that out with customers. AFAIK a lot of customers have managed namespaces that are controlled by the Platform team and where they should be able to add a default opt-out label on creation as they also add other things.

Reviewer 8: You could probably roll out slowly (and under shared control) with Policy API. We can discuss
